The DNI also serves as the principal advisor to the president of the United States, the [[United States National Security Council|National Security Council]], and the [[Homeland Security Council]] on all intelligence matters.
The DNI, supported by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), produces the President's Daily Brief, a highly classified document including intelligence from all IC agencies, shared each morning with the president of the United States.[1] The DNI, who is appointed by the president of the United States and is subject to confirmation by the [[United States Senate]], serves at the pleasure of the president.
President Donald Trump nominated [[Tulsi Gabbard]] to the position in 2025, and she was subsequently confirmed by the US Senate on February 12, 2025.[4][5]
The [[11 Commission|9/11 Commission]] recommended establishing the DNI position in its [[11 Commission Report|9/11 Commission Report]], not released until July 22, 2004, as it had identified major intelligence failures that called into question how well the intelligence community was able to protect U.S. interests against foreign terrorist attacks.
Senators [[Dianne Feinstein]], [[Jay Rockefeller]] and [[Bob Graham]] introduced S.
After considerable debate on the scope of the DNI's powers and authorities, the [[United States Congress]] passed the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 by votes of 336–75 in the [[United States House of Representatives|House of Representatives]], and 89–2 in the [[United States Senate|Senate]].
Critics say compromises during the bill's crafting led to the establishment of a DNI whose powers are too weak to adequately lead, manage and improve the performance of the intelligence community.[6] In particular, the law left the [[United States Department of Defense]] in charge of the National Security Agency (NSA), the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), and the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).
The first director of national intelligence was former U.S. ambassador to Iraq [[John Negroponte]] who was appointed on February 17, 2005, by President George W.
Gates]], who was serving as president of [[Texas A&M University]], but who declined the offer.[7] Negroponte was confirmed by a Senate vote of 98–2 on April 21, 2005, and he was sworn in by President Bush the same day.
On February 13, 2007, [[Mike McConnell]] became the second director of national intelligence, after Negroponte was appointed Deputy Secretary of State.
On July 20, 2010, President Barack Obama nominated retired Air Force lieutenant general [[James Clapper]] as the fourth DNI.
The fifth DNI, [[Dan Coats]], the sixth DNI, [[John Ratcliffe]], and acting DNIs [[Joseph Maguire]], [[Richard Grenell]] and [[Lora Shiao]], all served between March 16, 2017, and January 21, 2021, during the first administration of President Donald Trump.
The seventh DNI is [[Avril Haines]], who took office on January 21, 2021.
The first woman to hold the office, she was nominated by President-elect [[Joe Biden]] on November 23, 2020[10] and confirmed by the Senate on January 20, 2021.[11] She resigned January 20, 2025 at the conclusion of Joe Biden's term in office.
On November 13, 2024, President-elect Donald Trump announced his intention to nominate Army Reserve lieutenant colonel [[Tulsi Gabbard]] as the director of national intelligence upon returning to the presidency in January 2025.
Gabbard was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on February 12, 2025, replacing acting director [[Lora Shiao]].
[[Declan McCullagh]] at News.com wrote on August 24, 2007, that the DNI site was configured to repel all search engines to index any page at DNI.gov.
