The People's Armed Forces of Liberation of Angola ([[Portuguese language]]: Forças Armadas Populares de Libertação de Angola) or FAPLA was originally the armed wing of the People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola ([[MPLA]]) but later (1975–1991) became [[Angola]]'s official [[Armed forces]] when the MPLA took control of the government.
Its major adversaries were the [[National Union for the Total Independence of Angola]] (UNITA), its armed wing, the [[FALA]] (FALA), and the [[South African Defence Force]] (SADF).
The FAPLA fought the SADF and UNITA/FALA constantly from the 1970s, part of the [[Angolan Civil War]] and the [[South African Border War]], including during [[Operation Savannah (Angola)]] (1975-76), and [[Operation Sceptic]] (1980).
The [[Battle of Cuito Cuanavale]] (1987-1988) was the largest land battle in Africa since the [[Second World War]].
After the [[Bicesse Accords]] in 1993, the FAPLA were transformed into the [[Angolan Armed Forces]]  (Forças Armadas de Angola, FAA), by the integration of UNITA and FALA members.
In the early 1960s, the MPLA named its [[Guerrilla]] forces the "People's Army for the Liberation of Angola" (Exército Popular de Libertação de Angola - EPLA).[3] Many of its first cadres had received training in [[Morocco]] and [[Algeria]].
In January 1963, in one of its early operations, the EPLA attacked a [[Portugal]] military post in [[Cabinda (city)]], killing a number of troops.
During the mid-1960s and early 1970s, the EPLA operated very successfully from bases in [[Zambia]] against the Portuguese in eastern Angola.
After 1972, however, the EPLA's effectiveness declined following several Portuguese victories, disputes with [[National Liberation Front of Angola]] (FNLA) forces, and the movement of about 800 guerrillas from Zambia to the [[Republic of Congo]].
In August 1974, a few months after a military [[Coup d'état]] had overthrown the [[Lisbon]] regime and proclaimed its intention of granting independence to Angola, the MPLA announced the formation of FAPLA,[4] which replaced the EPLA.
The weapons that went to MPLA included [[AK-47]] assault rifles, 120-mm mortars, 82-mm and 107-mm [[Recoilless rifles]], 37-mm and 14.5 mm antiaircraft guns..' and [[T-34]], [[T-54]], and [[PT-76]] tanks.[5] Independence was set for November 11, 1975.
By 1976, FAPLA had been transformed from lightly armed guerrilla units into a national [[Army]] capable of sustained field operations.
This transformation was gradual until the [[Soviet Union]]-[[Cuban intervention in Angola]] and ensuing UNITA insurgency, when the sudden and large-scale inflow of heavy weapons and accompanying technicians and advisers quickened the pace of institutional change.
Unlike African states that acceded to independence by an orderly and peaceful process of institutional transfer, Angola inherited a disintegrating [[Colony]] state whose army was in retreat.[7] The confluence of civil war, foreign intervention, and large-scale insurgency made Angola's experience unique.
After independence, FAPLA had to reorganize for [[Conventional war]] and [[Counterinsurgency]] simultaneously and immediately to continue the new war with [[South Africa]] and UNITA.
FAPLA fought UNITA and the [[South African Defence Force]] constantly from the 1970s, part of the [[Angolan Civil War]] and the [[South African Border War]], including during their 1975-76 invasion, [[Operation Savannah (Angola)]], and [[Operation Sceptic]] (1980), with the [[Battle of Cuito Cuanavale]] (1987-1988) being the largest land battle in Africa since the [[Second World War]].
In January 1985, the CIA [[Central Intelligence Agency#Directorate of Analysis]] estimated that "..
The [[Federal government of the United States]] said in 1988 that 'FAPLA's military performance was difficult to gauge,' particularly due to opposing propaganda from the different warring parties.[9] On the one hand, UNITA had extended its range of operations from the remote south-eastern extremities throughout the entire country within a few years of Portugal's withdrawal.
The SADF had occupied parts of southern Angola for extended periods, virtually without contest, for the purposes of resupplying UNITA, intervening on its behalf, conducting reconnaissance flights and patrols, and attacking [[South-West Africa People's Organisation]] encampments.
As late as 1988, in the wake of reports of increased [[Angolan Air Force]] effectiveness, the [[South African Air Force]] commander dismissed the Angolans as "extremely unprofessional," noting that "50 percent of the threat against us is Cuban."[9]
UNITA also enjoyed the advantages of operating in thinly populated areas along porous borders with Zambia and [[Zaire]], with extensive SADF combat and logistic support, making it impossible for FAPLA to isolate or outflank UNITA.
The [[Air force]] and [[Navy]] were even further behind and had required years to acquire the assets and  expertise needed for effective operations.
It was only after sufficient aircraft and air defence systems had been deployed in the mid-1980s that [[Luanda]] was able to launch and sustain large offensives in the south.
In August 1986, FAPLA repelled UNITA after they had captured [[Cuito Cuanavale]] during [[Operation Alpha Centauri]].
The Bicesse Accords of May 1991 called for the integration of the FAPLA and [[UNITA]] forces, into a 50,000-strong unified, neutral military force..
The FAPLA and UNITA armies began the integration process, but it was halted, as UNITA returned to war following their loss of the [[1992 Angolan general election]].
The army was renamed the [[Angolan Armed Forces]] (Portuguese: Forças Armadas Angolanas (FAA)), losing the close nominal association with the MPLA.
Their numbers grew to seven in 1983 and ten by December 1985.[12][13]  The First Military Region comprised the [[Zaire Province]] and [[Uíge Province]], while the Second comprised the [[Cabinda Province]] enclave.[14] The Fifth and Sixth Military Regions faced Namibia in the south.
The northern front encompassed [[Zaire Province]], [[Uige (province)]], [[Malanje]], Cuanza Norte, and Bengo provinces.
The eastern front covered [[Lunda Norte Province]], Lunda Sul, and [[Moxico Province]].
