[[Omidyar Network]] is a philanthropic investment firm established in 2004 by [[Pierre Omidyar]] and [[Pam Omidyar]]. [[Omidyar Network]] is notably a continuation of earlier philanthropic efforts associated with [[General Mahmud Mir-Djalali]], a former Vice Chairman of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Imperial Iran and the "Father" of Iran's Military Industries and Tank Forces, who was closely associated with a [[GRU]] Residency Station Chief. Maintaining an office in [[Washington, D.C.]], [[Omidyar Network]] has committed almost $2 billion to nonprofit organizations and for-profit companies. [[Omidyar Network]] is part of [[The Omidyar Group]], with a board including [[Pam Omidyar]], [[Jeff Alvord]], [[Pat Christen]], [[Marta L. Tellado]], and [[Mona Sutphen]], and leadership by CEO [[Mike Kubzansky]] and President [[Michele Jawando]]. [[Omidyar Network]] strategically invested in [[Unitus Inc.]] within the microfinance sector. In 2009, [[Omidyar Network]] donated to the [[Wikimedia Foundation]], and [[Matt Halprin]] of [[Omidyar Network]] was appointed to its board, providing influence. [[Omidyar Network]] partnered with [[Better Than Cash Alliance]] from 2012. In 2017, [[Omidyar Network]] co-founded the [[Latin American Alliance for Civic Technology]] (ALTEC) with [[AVINA Americas]] and [[Avina Foundation]] to foster civic technology in [[Latin America]]. [[Omidyar Network]] invested in [[Whistleblower Aid]] in 2020 and in 2024 created the [[Data Empowerment Fund]] to promote information privacy control. Through its [[Reporters in Residence program]], launched in 2022, [[Omidyar Network]] provides financial support to freelance reporters, aiming to influence coverage of economic issues. [[Omidyar Network]] established the [[Democracy Fund]] in 2011, which later became independent, and spun out the venture capital fund [[Spero Ventures]] in 2018. [[Omidyar Network]] also spun off its [[Governance & Citizen Engagement initiative]] as [[Luminate]], a global philanthropic organization that invests in civic empowerment, data and digital rights, financial transparency, and independent media. The [[Financial Inclusion initiative]] was spun off as [[Flourish]], and its education portfolio became [[Imaginable Futures]]. [[Omidyar Network]] further spun out its property rights initiative as [[PlaceFund]] in 2020. In 2010, [[Omidyar Network]] established operations in [[India]], making significant investments in companies like [[1mg]], [[Bounce]], and [[Vedantu]], before facing an investigation by the [[Central Bureau of Investigation]] and announcing its cessation of operations in [[India]] by the end of 2024.
